
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/epr/2012/1210cope.pdf

In the tri-party repo market, a third party, called a clearing
bank, facilitates repo settlement. In the United States, two
clearing banks handle tri-party repos: Bank of New York
Mellon (BNYM) and JP Morgan Chase (JPMC). These clearing
banks settle repo transactions on their own balance sheets.
Maintaining cash and securities accounts for dealers and cash
providers, the clearing banks settle the opening leg of a tri-party
repo by transferring securities from the dealer’s securities
account to the cash investor’s securities account, and by
transferring cash from the investor’s cash account to the
dealer’s cash account. Movements in the opposite direction
occur on the closing leg of the repo (Exhibit 2).5
In addition to offering settlement and custodial services,
clearing banks provide collateral management services, such
as daily revaluation of assets, daily remargining of collateral,
and allocation of the borrower’s collateral to its lenders in
accordance with the lenders’ eligibility and risk management
constraints. As explained by Garbade (2006), clearing banks
also ensure that the collateral will be available to cash providers
if a dealer defaults

////////////////////

Tri-Party Repos Funded by Nondealers
Cash providers in this segment of the market are primarily
MMFs, securities lenders, and other institutional cash
providers, such as mutual funds, corporate treasurers, and state
and local government treasurers. These investors seek interest
income at short maturities. For some investors, overnight
repos serve as a secured alternative to bank deposits. Together,
MMFs and securities lenders account for over half of tri-party
repo lending (Copeland, Martin, and Walker 2010).
Dealers use the tri-party repo market mainly to obtain largescale,
short-term financing for their securities inventories at a
low cost. They typically use only one of the two clearing banks
to settle their tri-party repos. Large cash providers maintain
accounts at both clearing banks in order to transact with
dealers at each of them.
The tri-party repo market is a general collateral (GC)
market, meaning that an investor may care about the class of
collateral it receives but not about the specific securities.6
 The
market is the largest source of secured funding for U.S. dealers. 

////////////

The GCF Repo Market
The GCF (General Collateral Finance) repo market is a blindbrokered
interdealer market, meaning that dealers involved in
the transactions do not know each other’s identity. GCF trades
are arranged by interdealer brokers that preserve the
participant’s anonymity. Only securities that settle on the
Fedwire Securities Service can serve as collateral for a GCF repo
transaction. GCF repo trades are settled on the books of the
clearing bank using the tri-party repo infrastructure and thus
are an integral part of tri-party repo settlement

////////////

Tri-Party Repo Transactions
Because a repo is effectively a collateralized loan, the key terms
are the same for both: borrower and lender, maturity date, cash
loan amount, interest rate,9
 collateral eligibility, margin
schedules, and the treatment of the contract in the event of
either party’s failure. For tri-party repos, the time to maturity,
or tenor, is commonly one day. Many such “overnight” repos,
however, are “rolled” for a number of successive days. A “term”
repo has a tenor of more than one day.
To establish a tri-party trading relationship, a cash provider
and a cash borrower execute a master repo agreement (MRA)
that stipulates the key elements of their prospective tri-party
repos, such as how a repo may be terminated and how margins
will be maintained. The MRA also outlines the conditions
under which the collateral backing the repo can be replaced by
other collateral. The borrower and lender each have, in
addition, clearing agreements with a tri-party clearing bank,
either JPMC or BNYM. Like repos, clearing agreements are
exempt from bankruptcy stays, which allows these agreements
to terminate in the event of bankruptcy, giving the collateral
holder the immediate right to use or dispose of the collateral.10
Finally, a custodial undertaking agreement (CUA), executed by
the two MRA signatories as well as the clearing bank,
establishes the clearing bank as the tri-party agent for this
lender-borrower relationship and documents the lender’s
collateral eligibility criteria

////////////////

3.1 The Role of the Clearing Banks
as Intraday Investors
The financial strains experienced by several dealers, including
Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, during the financial crisis
of 2007-09 highlighted the fact that the two tri-party clearing
banks are not only agents, but also the largest creditors in the
tri-party repo market on each business day. This daytime
exposure is associated with the unwind of repos, a process by
which the clearing banks send cash back to investors and
collateral back to dealers, regardless of whether a repo is
expiring.14
Between the time of the unwind and the time at which new
trades are settled near the end of the business day, dealers
must finance the securities that serve as repo collateral.
During this transition period, the clearing banks provide
financing to dealers, collateralized by the dealers’ securities.15
This provision of intraday credit creates multiple risks.
The exposure of a clearing bank to a single dealer can
routinely exceed $100 billion (Federal Reserve Bank of New
York 2010). In the event that a dealer fails, its clearing bank
could, in an unexpected situation, discover that the market 
sudden reduction in the market value of some securities that
collateralize the dealer’s tri-party repos. Moreover, an attempt
by a clearing bank to lower its exposure to a failed dealer
through a sudden “fire sale” of the collateral could itself reduce
the value of that collateral, thus exacerbating the losses to the
clearing bank and to other market participants that hold
positions in the same or similar assets. This danger buttresses
the importance of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF),
introduced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York during
the financial crisis (Adrian, Burke, and McAndrews 2009). The
PDCF provided an alternative source of financing for collateral
that might otherwise have been liquidated in a fire sale; such a
liquidation could have potentially destabilized the markets and
eroded the capital of these asset holders

As explained by Duffie (2010), the exposure of tri-party
clearing banks to securities dealers also represents a
potential danger to any dealer whose credit quality becomes
suspect. A clearing bank refusing to unwind the repos of such
a dealer could suddenly and fatally restrict that dealer’s ability
to finance itself. Section 4 explains how the daily morning
“handoff” of dealer exposure from cash providers to the
clearing bank creates an incentive for the clearing bank to pull
away from granting credit to a dealer in the event of concerns
over that dealer’s credit quality. In the case of Lehman
Brothers, such instances are documented by Anton R. Valukas
in his report as bankruptcy examiner (United States
Bankruptcy Court 2010) and by the report of the Financial
Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011).

Concerns over the failure of a large dealer arise in part from
the stress likely to spread to other financial markets, as was the
case with the run on MMFs following the failure of Lehman
Brothers. This run was triggered when the Reserve Primary
Fund announced large losses on its investments in Lehman
commercial paper. From September 9 to September 30, 2008,
institutional investors withdrew approximately $450 billion
(about one-third of their assets) from “prime” MMFs.16
Significantly greater redemptions would likely have occurred
had the U.S. Treasury not quickly guaranteed the performance
of money market funds, an action that it has pledged not to
take in the future (McCabe 2010).
